Template Changes and FAQ update (#9)
LibreTexts/jupyterhub-templates: faqrenderer/faq.md

# On this page (create a table of contents here with anchors):

- Which environment should I choose?
- How do I access RStudio?
- How can I install custom packages?
- How do I create a Conda environment?
- What is a Jupyter kernel?
- How do I restart my JupyterLab server?
- Can I recieve announcements about downtime for jupyter.libretexts.org?

## For Instructors

- How do I distribute files to students?
- How do I set up custom environments for my class?

## Which environment should I choose?

After logging in to JupyterHub, you will be taken to a Server Options page where you may select your JupyterLab evironment. This will determine the languages, packages, and kernels available to you. You should continue with whichever option is selected by default unless you have a specific reason to do otherwise.

> The New Default Environment is what most users should choose for general JupyterLab use. It is an updated version of what is now called Legacy Default Environment. In this new environment, all supported languages except for Octave and C++ have been upgraded. Depending on the language, some syntax might have changed, so be sure to test your code to see if it works on a newer version. Here's a list of all the languages we support and the version changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "New Default Environment" is what most users should choose for general JupyterLab use. It is an updated version of what is now called "Legacy Default Environment". In this new environment, all supported languages except for Octave and C++ have been upgraded. Depending on the language, some syntax might have changed, so be sure to test your code to see if it works on a newer version. Here's a list of all the languages we support and the version changes:
```

Reviewer: Or use bold or italics for the env names. Something to stand out.

Author: Using bold font for these.

| Language | Old version | New version |
| - | - | - |
| Python | 3.6 | 3.7.8 |
| R | 3.6.1 | 4.0.2 |
| Julia | 1.1.0 | 1.5.0 |
| Octave | 4.2.2 | 4.2.2 |
| C++ (cling) | 0.6 | 0.6 |
| SageMath | 8.1 | 9.1 |

Most of the packages included in this New Default Environment are at their latest version as of August 2020. Compared to the legacy environment, a few packages have been removed in this new environment, which are listed below. 

> - pymol and ipymol: Requires extra conda channels and is not free software. Can be installed manually in a new conda environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- pymol and ipymol: Requires extra conda channels and is not entirely open source software. Can be installed manually in a new conda environment.
```

- opty: Requires Python <=3.6. Can be installed manually in a new conda environment with Python 3.6.
- rpy2: Requires R <= 4.0. Can be installed manually in a new conda environemt with R 3.6.

If you require the above packages or older versions of existing ones, you should use the legacy environment or [create a conda environment](#how-do-i-create-a-conda-environment) with your custom package versions. Please email us at [jupyterteam@ucdavis.edu](mailto:jupyterteam@ucdavis.edu) if you have concerns or issues with the new environment.

## How do I access RStudio?

To open the RStudio interface, you can select the RStudio notebook icon from the Jupyter Launcher (Ctrl+Shift+L). This will open a new JupyterLab tab which has an RStudio interface and access to all the same packages you would find elsewhere on your account.

![RStudio Launcher icon](RStudio-launcher.png)

## How can I install custom packages?

> You are free to install any additional packages available through conda by [creating a conda environment](#how-do-i-create-a-conda-environment), or by running [conda install 'package'](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/concepts/installing-with-conda.html) commands within your custom environment. These packages will persist for you. You may also use `conda install` directly in the `(notebook)` environment provided by default, but these packages won't be permanent and will be wiped anytime your server restarts.

Reviewer: You need to be careful with the word "environment" as both jupyterhub and conda have the concept "environment" and they are different things. This sentence mixes the two meanings.

Reviewer: Probably should always write "conda environment" and "jupyterhub environment" for clarity. Defining them each when first used would be good too.

Author: Added a brief description for what our jupyterhub environments actually are (docker images), and will specify throughout the rest of document which type of environment is being talked about

> For packages not available through conda or for languages which have their own package manager such as SageMath and Julia, we suggest that you [email us](mailto:jupyterteam@ucdavis.edu) to provide them for you by default in the environment. Packages must be installed to the `/home/jovyan/` directory to persist and Jula and SageMath do not install there by default. For Instructors wanting to use custom packages for their class, [you'll probably want to email us as well](#how-do-i-set-up-custom-environments-for-my-class).

Reviewer: You need to state here that we will only install packages from Ubuntu 20.4 (or 18.04 if we are still on that) APT repositories https://packages.ubuntu.com/ or from conda-forge https://conda-forge.org/feedstocks/. Anyone can submit packages to both systems: https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/distribute-deb/distribute-deb.html and https://conda-forge.org/#contribute. Once packages are available there, email us with the package names and we will install them.

Any other packages must be installed individually by the user using the recommended installation process of the package.

Author: Currently we install Julia packages outside of both APT and conda using Project.toml. I'm not precisely sure how we could install additional SageMath packages (of if that would ever be necessary, since it installs a ton of stuff for itself), but we install the language itself via a postBuild file. Should I instead just say that the only APT packages we can support are for bionic 18.04 (our verison), and conda packages must be thru conda-forge? Of course, also mentioning how to submit to these.

## How do I create a Conda environment?

The best way to permanently install new packages onto your account is through conda environments. Using conda environments, you may also build Jupyter notebooks and consoles which contain only the programming language and packages that you need. Follow the steps below to create one.

1. In the top left corner, open a terminal by going to File->New->Terminal or open a New Launcher (Ctrl+Shift+L) and select terminal from the 'other' section.

  ![Finding the Terminal](terminal.png)

> 2. Within the terminal, use the command `conda create -n 'your_env_name' 'kernel' 'packages'` to create your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Within the terminal, use the command `conda create -n <your_env_name> <kernel> <packages>` to create your environment.
```

It think this is a bit more common for noting a placeholder. You can also just point them to the conda documentation on this.

  Once the notebook opens, you can verify that you are using the proper environment by looking in the top right corner;

  ![Notebook environment](notebook.png) 

5. Now your conda environment is created! You may access it in the terminal by `conda activate 'your_env_name'` or as a notebook from the launcher. 

Note that if you want to use your environment with a Jupyter notebook, you must install a [Jupyter kernel](#what-is-a-jupyter-kernel) along with your packages. Here's a list of common languages and their kernels which are supported through conda:

| Language | Jupyter kernel |
| - | - |
| Python | ipykernel |
| R | r-irkernel |
| C++ | xeus-cling |
| Octave | octave_kernel |

You may view all your created conda environments using `conda env list`. To remove an environment, use `conda env remove -n your_env_name`. For reference, all of your created environments are stored in `/home/jovyan/.conda/envs/`. You can learn more about [managing environments](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html) and [more conda commands](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/commands.html) from the linked documentation.

> 

Reviewer: This conda env creation is really nicely done. Much clearer than before!

Reviewer: You should probably warn them about disk space limits. If we are only giving like 2Gb per user, you can kill that with a single conda env pretty quickly. We should probably give people 5 to 10gb at least.

Author: We can change it to 10GB or potentially give them even more storage than that. 10GB is probably a good starting point though. Let me know and we'll mention it in the FAQ and change that in the helm values. 

For reference, we have 57TB of storage. With roughly 200 users of the hub right now, we could give each user 100GB and still only use 20TB. Obviously the goal is to include more users, but we have a LOT of room to add more storage for each user.

Reviewer: Let's give everyone 10 GB.

## What is a Jupyter kernel?

Jupyter kernels are the backend code which allow you to execute the code you write within Jupyter software like notebooks and consoles. For instance, if you have ever used JupyterLab locally for python programming then you have made use of the [ipython kernel](https://ipython.org/). Kernels are what change your notebook from a static text page to interactable programming shells. This is why you must include a kernel in your conda environment to run the environment as a notebook.

> 

Reviewer: Jupyter kernels process the code you type and display the results to Jupyter notebook, console, or other tools. This typically means that each kernel supports a specific programming language and version.

Reviewer: Use the above sentence to improve what you have written. I found yours a bit foggy.

> Kernels have a runtime which is independent of any given notebook, console, or terminal, and you can find more about [managing kernels](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/running.html) from the official JupyterLab documentation. You generally should not have to worry about stopping and restarting kernels, but it may be useful for certain debugging purposes. A full list of Jupyter Kernels is available [here](https://github.com/jupyter/jupyter/wiki/Jupyter-kernels).

Reviewer: Add "if you'd like us to support additional kernels, email us at..."

## How do I restart my JupyterLab server?

> On Libretexts JupyterHub, you spawn servers that provide you with JupyterLab software and you execute your code using kernels. If you are actively running code and something unexpected occurs, [restarting the kernel](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/running.html) can often be an easy solution. However, sometimes the problem may be deeper than that, especially if some of your files were incorrectly modified. In this case, it could be a good idea to restart your server. 

Reviewer: We should call it the "LibreTexts/UC Davis JupyterHub".

Go to File->Hub Control Panel and you will be brought to a page with "Stop Server" and "My Server" buttons. Press Stop Server and you should see that that the My Server button will dim; this means that the server is stopping. When the server has stopped (this should take less than 15 seconds), the webpage will prompt you with a "Start My Server" option. Press it, launch the server, and then you will be brought back to the Server Options page. Proceed with the environment of your choice, and you will now have a fresh server.

> By default, your server will always shutdown after 1 hour of inactivity. All files which you wish to modify and save across restarts must be located in your `/home/jovyan` directory; everything else will be wiped. Think of these user files as being stored in a cloud, and each time you start JupyterLab, we provide you with a brand new server which has downloaded your specific files. For more technical information on how your files are stored, see the Jupyterhub for Kubernetes documentation [here](https://zero-to-jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/latest/customizing/user-environment.html#about-user-storage-and-adding-files-to-it). 

Reviewer: I think telling users that "everything else will be wiped" is worrisome. Just tell them that everything stored in /hom/jovyan is kept, so don't store files in other locations.

Reviewer: We should tell them that files are backup weekly/daily/? by us, but they should download any important files and back them up themselves.

Author: We'll have to check with Richard about a backup schedule. Last time that the backup was being preformed, it basically overloaded and crashed the whole cluster. This happened last Monday if I recall correctly; we discussed it briefly during that meeting. I'll make the other changes though.

Reviewer: @rfeltstykket What's the status on the hen backup? How often do you plan to run it?

## Can I recieve accouncements for downtime and other critical information about jupyter.libretexts.org?

If you wish to recieve updates from the JupyterTeam about possible downtime for jupyter.libretexts.org, you can subscribe to our [mailing list](https://lists.ucdavis.edu/sympa/subscribe/flock-announce). Just enter your email and you will recieve emails whenever we notify Hub users about downtime and maintenance.

# For Instructors

## How do I distribute files to students?

> You can distribute files using [nbgitpuller](https://jupyterhub.github.io/nbgitpuller/index.html). Please store your files in a GitHub repository and we can set up a custom environment that will update the files whenever a student spawns a server. This is a good option since students don't need to understand git, but keep in mind that nbgitpuller does have [some limitations](https://jupyterhub.github.io/nbgitpuller/topic/automatic-merging.html). Other options include hosting your files on an external site, like GitHub or Google Drive, where students can download them.

Reviewer: Do we know that we have this feature installed and enabled? Have you tried it?

Author: I've never tried it and I don't know if it works. We could test, but based on your comments below, it looks like we're just removing this.

Reviewer: I didn't mean to remove this section. Please see if nbgitpuller is in installed and works. We'd like to support it.

Author: We've added nbgitpuller to our repo2docker environment and have confirmed that it works. Basically nbgitpuller allows instructors to make links tied to any git repository they would like, and then whenever students click the link, it adds the files within that repo to their jupyterlab home directory (which can be specified within the link). The FAQ here makes it sound like we need to set up some custom environments, but I don't think that this would be necessary for nbgitpuller.

[Here](https://jupyterhub.github.io/nbgitpuller/link?hub=https://jupyter.libretexts.org&app=jupyterlab) is a nbgitpuller link generator that is prepopulated with all the necessary fields except for the git repo to pull from. We can briefly direct instructors to this link and then tell them to fill out the git repo field, and then share the link with their students. Or you may want us to do this process for them as the current wording implies. Let us know what you think. @moorepants

Reviewer: If the instructor can setup their use of nbgitpuller independent of us, then we should instruct them to do so. It isn't clear to me what we'd need to do to help them get this setup.

> ## How do I set up custom environments for my class?

Reviewer: I think we should probably remove this section for now. When we get someone that default-env can't support, then we can figure out the best way to do this. In the future we can support advanced users that create custom repo2docker configuration files, but for now, no.

Author: You only want to remove the "How do I distribute files" section, to be clear?

Reviewer: No, remove "## How do I set up custom environments for my class?"
